Imagine, if you will, a universe. 
This universe is quite dissimilar to ours – instead of having spherical planets and stars, it has one single flat plane. Air and water collects in the (mostly) flat plane, forming seas and an atmosphere; below the plane lies infinite rock, and above the air, a couple miserable excuses of stars (that don't fall onto the plane for some reason) sputter about, and further up still, nothing. Indeed, there is evidence that this particular universe has a limited-range gravity, as it seems like the stars are moving in straight lines and doesn't seem to be affected by each other's gravity as long as they are not too close to each other. The infinite plane of rock of course, pins the water and the air to itself.
People live on the flat plane. But these people are special. In fact, their special feature is that shared by the entire universe:
the universe is five dimensional. It has three spatial dimensions, one time, and one very strange axis that I shall call the good–evil dimension.
The good–evil dimension is a spatial dimension, like the other three. But like one of them, which has a clear direction (down), and unlike the other two, the good–evil dimension too has very visible effects on your perception.
All inhabitants on the flat plane are five-dimensional; their bodies extend not only forwards and backwards, left and right and up and down, they also extend to the good and evil axis.
Now, imagine you enter this strange universe.
You are merely four dimensional and have no good–evil extent. To the inhabitants you would look like to them like what Flat Stanley would look like to you – an impossibly thin object that somehow still manages to live. You would not be able to process information that comes from you in the "extra" spatial dimension, so everything would look normal to you.
One day, you were pitied by one of the inhabitants of this strange universe, who decided to give you a taster of what the extra dimension will look like. To start off, the inhabitant will send you five thousand kilometres evilward, then come back and give you a trip of five thousand kilometres goodward.
As you travel evilward, things get more sinister (as its name suggests). The light from the passing stars start to dim and turn red. Trees start to become gnarly and dark. Sometimes, an object may seem to look the same for many kilometres towards evil, and then suddenly "snap" and become evil-looking. This is analogous to a "cliff" or a "corner" in ordinary space. The sky becomes ever darker, and you cannot see anything anymore. The very harness that binds you to the companion becomes prickly and spikey. The companion slowly reels you back in.
Things started morphing again, but only in reverse. Sometimes the evilness suddenly goes away – this is again the corners. But other times the evilness disappears only slowly – this is analogous to climbing a slope in three-dimensional space. And after a 10,000 kilometre trip, you find yourself exactly where you started with. Your travel companion tells you, "you have not moved a single inch in the three dimensions you are familiar with. This is all just changes in the extra dimension."
("Plus time of course. You're still moving forward in time.")
The trip goodwards is very much the same as the trip evilwards, only with the patterns that you saw when you're moving goodward continue. Things become more hilariously flowery and all kinds of generic methodics of "good". The light slowly turns blue and white; soon, it became blinding. All you can feel is the tether, which has become as fluffy as cotton candy while still remaining strong as steel. You were almost drugged by the euphoria as you were dragged back.
Your trip ends right back where you started with, and that is how a "fifth dimension" would work in real life. Minus all the evil and the good, but the general principle remains the same – you would only be able to experience it by substituting the extra dimension with time, you will be able to see things morph in and out of existence, sometimes with sharp appearances and disappearances, and other times with a gradual change from one to another.