húnni tak t'upessúrsusu.

nún húnni t'unnewe t'u nuk'utta.

húnni nesen t'u nesari.

t'ubin gútta - nek'ruwatta!


grammatical overview:
  this lingo is SOV.
  repeated information likes to be expressed solely as person affixes.
  relative clauses come before the noun they modify.
  the head noun of a relative clause only shows up inside the relative clause itself, and shunts out a filler pronoun in the main clause.
  the distant past tense is used at the beginning of stories, kind of like a "once upon a time". after that, related events are told in the present tense.
  nouns and pronouns are generally ambiguous to number. less animate things "feel" more plural, whereas more animate things "feel" more singular.
  more topical things like to be further to the left on this scale (subject - object - other stuff).
  everything else should be self-evident with the information i'm giving you below. if it isn't, boopdoop me a message and i'll help you.
  
roots and the like:
  ar: v. (INTR) to be standing (unmoving), remain (in a location), live (somewhere)
  ewe: v. (TR) to be above (something)
  hanni: n. sun
  ru: v. (INTR) to move
  sari: v. (TR) to push, knock over
  sen: v. (TR) to be below (something)
  tak: n. night sky
  (u)k': adv. to do something correctly, perfectly, (when used on the actions of others) signifies affection, closeness, (when used on one's own actions, impolite, often childish) bragging or being proud of the action or its result
  utta: v. (TR) to touch, to caress (something/someone)

notroots and the like:
 verbs
  subject pronouns (normal, bound, respectful/humble (boastful)
    1st: nu, n(ә~)-, nban, (nún)
	2nd: a, a(Q)-, án
	3rd: t'u, t'(u)-, t'ún
  object pronouns (normal, bound, respectful/humble)
    1st: nu(h), nn-, nbanu
	2nd: á(h), á(Q/h)-, áhan
	3rd: t'u(h), {}-, t'úhan
	4th: gwe(h), -p(e)(Q)-
  tense
    past
	 recent/normal: -s(u)
	 distant/irrelevant ("at some point"): -susu/-ssu
   evidentials / modality
    positive belief marker (really / i swear) / "should", "must": -t:a
  transitivity:
	locative (adds an argument to promote a locative): -su-
	causative (adds a new subject argument and demotes the old one to object): -wa
    passive: -gu-
 nouns
  honorifics:
	a subordinate: -bin (originally "one that is important (sometimes emotionally), now more like "someone who is useful", still remains a very old-fashioned way to talk about a spouse (generally female to male))
  reduplication:
    full reduplication: plural
	first syllable Cu-: diminutive
	
	